As of 2006, there are over 24 million Americans playing soccer. There are 4.2 million players (2.5 million men and 1.7 million women) registered with U.S. Soccer.[18] Thirty percent of American households contain someone playing soccer, a figure second only to baseball.[19] Increasing numbers of Americans, having played the game in their youth, are now avid spectators. A 2012 ESPN sports poll ranked soccer as the #2 most popular sport in the country for 12-24 year olds.[20] Most cities with MLS teams have large fan bases, and cities with USL teams have support on par with minor league teams in other sports.[citation needed] In addition, as Latin American immigration increases throughout the entire nation, so does the popularity of soccer. Furthermore, the increase in popularity of soccer in the United States is also the result of other factors such as globalization (with the resulting greater TV exposure being given by sports channels to soccer competition), the continued presence of US teams in international competitions, and the continued building of soccer-specific stadiums in the country.

Certain soccer matches in the United States have drawn large crowds. The 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup quarterfinal matches drew over 82,000 to Cowboys Stadium. Between 2008 - 2011, the US played three times in East Rutherford, NJ, drawing over 78,000 fans each game.[13] The United States and Mexico national teams have been playing in front of crowds in excess of 60,000 in the U.S. in recent years. The 2011 Gold Cup final between the U.S. and Mexico at the Rose Bowl drew over 93,000 fans, a record high for a soccer match in the U.S. other than the World Cup or Summer Olympics.[citation needed]

In recent years, many top-division European clubs—such as English giants Manchester United and Chelsea FC, and Spanish giants Real Madrid and Barcelona—have spent portions of their pre-season summer schedule playing matches in the United States. These matches have been highly attended events for U.S. stadiums. The 2009 World Football Challenge drew large crowds around the country, and Chelsea's four-game stint in the United States drew record crowds for a visiting foreign team.[21]
